docs: Introduce GenAI Contributions Policy for Alloy Project (#6580)
grafana/alloy: docs/developer/genai.md

# Generative AI Contribution Policy

> Generative AI (GenAI) tools such as large language model (LLM) assistants can help you write code,

Reviewer: nit: wdyt about using a "human" term instead of "you"?

"you" can be misinterpreted by an agent as themselves.

Author: hmm but this is a policy that is supposed to read by humans - and the rest of the document refers to the reader as "you"

> documentation, and proposals for Grafana Alloy. This policy explains what is an acceptable use of GenAI tools
> when contributing to the project.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
documentation, and proposals for Grafana Alloy. As a contributor, you remain
responsible for everything you submit. This policy describes what is acceptable 
when using these tools to contribute to the project.
```

@x1unix  Maybe a small change like this would clarify the point?

## Core principle

**The human contributor is always in control and fully responsible for their contribution.**

GenAI is a tool that assists you. It is not a substitute for your own understanding, judgment, or

> accountability. By submitting a contribution, you are vouching for it as your own work, regardless

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
accountability. By submitting a contribution, you vouch for it as your own work, regardless
```

of which tools helped you produce it. You are expected to understand, review, and provide rationale for
everything you submit.

## Acceptable use

You are welcome to use GenAI tools to:

- Write or refactor code and documentation, as long as you actively review and refine the output.
- Understand the Alloy codebase, a component, or a subsystem before contributing or reviewing.
- Draft issues, proposals, or design documents that you then verify and shape into your own
  reasoning.
- Translate, summarize, or improve the clarity of text you have written.

> In all cases, you remain the author: you read the output, you correct it, and you ensure your contribution meets the project's standards before submitting an issue, pull request, or comment.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In all cases, you remain the author. You read the output, you correct it, and you ensure your
contribution meets the project's standards before submitting an issue, pull request, or comment.
```

## Not acceptable

Do not:

> - Submit unreviewed, bulk AI-generated content to pull requests, issues or proposals. If you

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Submit unreviewed, bulk AI-generated content to pull requests, issues, or proposals. If you
```

  did not read and understand it, do not submit it.
- Use GenAI as a substitute for human judgment in code review. An AI tool may help you understand a
  change, but the review and its conclusions must be yours.
- File automated, bot-driven issues or pull requests. This policy covers humans using AI assistance,

>   not autonomous agents acting on their own.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  not autonomous agents acting on their own, including agentic IDE tools that file pull requests
  without human review..
```

Some slight additional clarification?

Author: https://github.com/grafana/alloy/pull/6580/changes/d1db8e4893f7481f18d4a0eea6e232a2ad0e36a6

- Paste generated text into a discussion as if it were a considered human response without adding

>   your own analysis and context.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Paste generated text into a discussion without adding your own analysis and context.
```

I think this is a bit more direct, WDYT?

Author: yeah that's more to the point 👍

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Submit PRs or issues which do not follow our defined templates
```

AI Agents love to ignore issue/PR templates

Maintainers may close low-effort AI-generated contributions, following the same
[issue triage process][issue-triage] used for other contributions. When they do, they should explain
why and, where appropriate, offer guidance on how to improve the contribution. Repeated low-effort

> submissions will trigger additional review and offending users blocked from further contributing.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
submissions will trigger stricter review, and maintainers may block repeat offenders from contributing.
```

## Disclosure

When GenAI generates the **bulk** of a contribution, disclose it. For pull requests, check the
**"This pull request was substantially generated with AI assistance"** box in the pull request
template. Minor, incidental help such as autocomplete or small edits does not need to be disclosed.

Disclosure is not a mark against your contribution. It helps reviewers calibrate their attention and

> keeps the project's expectations transparent.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Disclosure is not a mark against your contribution. It helps reviewers know where to focus, and it
keeps expectations clear for everyone.
```

Slight wording change to be more clear

## Licensing and provenance

Grafana Alloy is licensed under [Apache 2.0][license], and all contributions require a signed
[Contributor License Agreement (CLA)][cla]. These obligations apply equally to AI-assisted
contributions.

When you contribute AI-assisted code or content, you warrant that:

- You have the right to contribute it under the project's license and CLA.
- It does not reproduce code or text from sources whose licenses are incompatible with Apache 2.0
  (for example, GPL-licensed or proprietary code that an LLM may have reproduced from its training
  data).
- Any third-party code or dependencies it introduces are license-compatible and follow the
  [dependency guidance][contributing-deps] in the contributing guide.

Because Alloy vendors and wraps many upstream components, provenance matters. If you are unsure

> whether generated code is original or where it came from, do not submit it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Alloy vendors and wraps many upstream components. Provenance matters, so check where generated code came from.
If you are unsure whether the generated code is original or license-compatible, do not submit it.
```

## Alloy-specific guidance

LLMs frequently hallucinate Alloy configuration syntax, component names, and component arguments,
and may produce configurations or components that do not match the current schemas. Always validate

> AI-generated code and configuration against the real component definitions and the project's checks.

Reviewer 2: Should we link to the component ref docs here? 

Can/should we name tools? Or reference them in some way? Or is it enough to just say "project's checks"?

Author: This was adjusted as part of [this thread](https://github.com/grafana/alloy/pull/6580#discussion_r3458324791) to include the docs - but if there's still something missing in there let me know

# Generative AI Contribution Policy

Generative AI (GenAI) tools such as large language model (LLM) assistants can help you write code,

> documentation, and proposals for Grafana Alloy. This policy explains how to use them responsibly

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
documentation, and proposals for Grafana Alloy. This policy explains what is an acceptable use of GenAI tools
```

when contributing to the project.

## Core principle

**The human contributor is always in control and fully responsible for their contribution.**

GenAI is a tool that assists you. It is not a substitute for your own understanding, judgment, or
accountability. By submitting a contribution, you are vouching for it as your own work, regardless

> of which tools helped you produce it. You are expected to understand, review, and stand behind

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
of which tools helped you produce it. You are expected to understand, review, and provide rationale for
```

everything you submit.

> ## Acceptable use

Reviewer 4: Should we mention that we have bots that we have approved such as Copilot and Dependency Review (and may have more in the future) that are acceptable use, but they will always be clearly marked as bot contributions?

Author: yes! I think thats worth pointing out, i'll add something

Author: wdyt https://github.com/grafana/alloy/pull/6580/commits/19be9698a046abfe0452196ec77393cc059586b0

You are welcome to use GenAI tools to:

- Write or refactor code and documentation, as long as you actively review and refine the output.
- Understand the Alloy codebase, a component, or a subsystem before contributing or reviewing.
- Draft issues, proposals, or design documents that you then verify and shape into your own
  reasoning.
- Translate, summarize, or improve the clarity of text you have written.

In all cases, you remain the author: you read the output, you correct it, and you make sure it meets

> the project's standards before submitting.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
In all cases, you remain the author: you read the output, you correct it, and you ensure your contribution meets the project's standards before submitting an issue, pull request, or comment.
```

## Not acceptable

> Do not:

Reviewer 4: I think we should maybe say that it's not acceptable to wire an AI agent so that it responds automatically to reviewers and other community members. The rule of a thumb is that humans talk with humans. If you want help from GenAI - use it directly yourself, don't wire it to talk to maintainers.

Author: https://github.com/grafana/alloy/pull/6580/changes/cd1a9f0eaf2178cfd2ec5e9b219a791c5cdfa1c7

- Submit unreviewed, bulk AI-generated content to pull requests, issues or proposals. If you
  did not read and understand it, do not submit it.
- Use GenAI as a substitute for human judgment in code review. An AI tool may help you understand a
  change, but the review and its conclusions must be yours.

> - File automated, bot-driven issues or pull requests. This policy covers humans using AI assistance,

Reviewer 4: Some overlap with the first point. But I think what we need to add explicitly as not acceptable is GenAI used for triaging and responding directly to maintainers when discussing a PR or an issue.

Author: I think that's handled with the commit introduced as a response to [this comment](https://github.com/grafana/alloy/pull/6580#discussion_r3458350876) eh?

  not autonomous agents acting on their own.

> - Paste generated text into a discussion as if it were a considered human response without adding

Reviewer 4: reminds me of https://noslopgrenade.com/ but we don't need to link to it

Author: I like that slop vs no-slop summary tbh - maybe it doesn't have to be in the first iteration but I sometimes see AI PR's have very long PR descriptions that go very much into the how but not the why. Having some sort of guidance which highlights striking a balance in descriptions and understanding the "why" a bit more could be nice to include

  your own analysis and context.

Maintainers may close low-effort AI-generated contributions, following the same
[issue triage process][issue-triage] used for other contributions. When they do, they should explain
why and, where appropriate, offer guidance on how to improve the contribution. Repeated low-effort

> submissions may be escalated to the Alloy team and offending users blocked from further contributing.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
submissions will trigger additional review and offending users blocked from further contributing.
```

keeps the project's expectations transparent.

## Licensing and provenance

Grafana Alloy is licensed under [Apache 2.0][license], and all contributions require a signed
[Contributor License Agreement (CLA)][cla]. These obligations apply equally to AI-assisted
contributions.

When you contribute AI-assisted code or content, you warrant that:

- You have the right to contribute it under the project's license and CLA.
- It does not reproduce code or text from sources whose licenses are incompatible with Apache 2.0
  (for example, GPL-licensed or proprietary code that an LLM may have reproduced from its training
  data).
- Any third-party code or dependencies it introduces are license-compatible and follow the
  [dependency guidance][contributing-deps] in the contributing guide.

Because Alloy vendors and wraps many upstream components, provenance matters. If you are unsure
whether generated code is original or where it came from, do not submit it.

## Alloy-specific guidance

LLMs frequently hallucinate Alloy configuration syntax, component names, and component arguments,
and may produce configurations or components that do not match the current schemas. Always validate

> AI-generated code and configuration against the real component definitions and the project's checks.

Reviewer 4: Maybe we can say that it's good idea to point LLMs towards Alloy documentation so it can find the answers rather than using its training knowledge.

Reviewer 2: You can also tell the AI agent to validate against source code (and name a specific version/git tag)...it's a good second level check.

Author: yeah good points - hows this? https://github.com/grafana/alloy/pull/6580/changes/fe23a5da3f8b8dcd8df8a2a77418f39673651367

- You have the right to contribute it under the project's license and CLA.
- It does not reproduce code or text from sources whose licenses are incompatible with Apache 2.0
  (for example, GPL-licensed or proprietary code that an LLM may have reproduced from its training
  data).
- Any third-party code or dependencies it introduces are license-compatible and follow the
  [dependency guidance][contributing-deps] in the contributing guide.

Because Alloy vendors and wraps many upstream components, provenance matters. If you are unsure
whether generated code is original or where it came from, do not submit it.

## Alloy-specific guidance

LLMs frequently hallucinate Alloy configuration syntax, component names, and component arguments,
and may produce configurations or components that do not match the current schemas. Always validate
AI-generated code and configuration against the real component definitions and the project's checks.

For new components and larger changes, follow the existing [proposal process][proposal-process].
A proposal or design document must reflect your own reasoning. AI may help you draft it, but you own
the argument in the public consensus discussion.

> If you contribute a [community component][community-components], remember that doing so makes you its

Reviewer 6: Is this true? I mean in theory I guess it could be but I have never seen any component specific maintainers

Author: oh woops, I thought I had removed this part - I didn't think it made sense to be in here since we have other docs on what community components mean. I'll remove this small paragraph now
